[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If I want to be part of
a relationship going to God,
my job is to keep free.
That's what I can offer
into the situation.
So no matter how nitty gritty
it happens with the partner,
your work is on yourself.
Now, you may have a
relationship with your partner
where you can say, you are
driving me up the wall.
But you're doing
what you need to do.
The fact that I'm climbing
the wall is my problem.
I'm not asking for
anything from you.
We're just sharing
truth with one another.
You just keep the channels open.
As Maharaji said
to me, do what you
do with another human being,
but never put them out
of your heart.
And the only ones
you have to be scared
of in one of these
volatile relationships
is that the thing
that the other person
does, which disconfirms your
model of how they should be--
which is the only
thing that's making
you suffer in the first place--
that that thing,
you would rather
hold on to how you
think it should be,
than to deal with how it is.
And in order to hold on to
how you think it should be,
you close your heart
to the other person.
That's the only one
to be concerned about.
And all you can do
with that point is
to say to the other person,
I've closed my heart to you.
Help me open it again.
And their help isn't that they
do what you want them to do,
it is merely that they
appreciate that your heart is
closed and they help
you with whatever love
they have to help you with.
This is very, very volatile
and delicate stuff.
And there are often
times when you'd rather
run away than play again.
You just almost get
burned out from trying,
because it almost seems as if
our personality dynamics that
keep us locked in
these separatenesses
are stronger than our
desire for liberation.
But patience and trust
and just goodwill
and a real yearning
for God will keep you
right in the middle
of that fire and will
keep you letting go in yourself
again and again and again.
And you're surrendering to God.
You're not surrendering to
the will of the other person.
You're surrendering to God.
Most people want to want
to be free this lifetime.
They don't want to be free.
And when you want to be
free, There's no pride,
there's no grudges.
Why would you hold on to anger?
Do you want to be free?
Anger is not going
to get you there.
What do you need it for?
Anything that doesn't
go, gets chunked.
You're ruthless with yourself
when you really want God.
When you just want
to want God, you just
want to be somebody
who, in your own eyes,
is going towards liberation.
I can be busy being
somebody that's
been maligned, self-pity, anger,
feeling old, feeling whatever.
Or I can say, well, look
at all these feelings.
Isn't that far out.
And here I still am.
And it hurts like hell.
And the karma of the act
is in the other person.
And you're not
blaming or anything.
All I can feel is compassion
if you get stuck in stuff.
All I have to do is stay
there with my heart open.
Suddenly, there's a new moment
and all that became irrelevant.
Such a delicate dance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]